[WIND]
[CLICK]
[CHIME AND MUSIC]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In 1997, Holley Moyes, an
archeologist at the University
of California, led an expedition
to survey a large cave system
in Belize, known as
Actun Tunichil Muknal.
As they followed a bizarre
complex of chambers
three miles into the Earth,
they discovered thousands
of offerings to ancient gods,
including the skeletal remains
of thousands of human
sacrifices, and tools,
and ceramics made from the
semi-precious stone obsidian.
What made this find
even more unusual
was that as Holley and her
team followed the trail
deeper and deeper into the cave,
it appeared to have no end.
Where would it
ultimately lead to?
Descriptions of the
caves in the "Popol Vuh,"
an ancient Maya
creation myth, has
led many to believe these
archeologists had uncovered
an opening to the
ancient underworld, known
as Xibalba, a much feared
threshold to the afterlife.
>> The Maya have an interesting
and related legend about
an underworld called Xibalba.
Xibalba is basically
their version of hell.
And these lords of the
underworld in the Mayan story
cycle are basically
reptilian-headed humanoids.
You have one guy who's
got a crocodile head.
Another has got an iguana head.
Chaac, the rain goddess, has a
bird head, which is, you know,
somewhat reptilian.
And this is a theme,
again, that we find
throughout underworld lore.
Stories about beings that
rule these nether regions
are often reptilian,
yet humanoid.
>> Reptilian, yet humanoid is
not a new myth in the ancient
world.
But are these Mayan
myths of an underground
simply folklore or could there
be some scientific evidence
that habitable places below
the Earth could exist?
>> The hollow Earth theory has
been around for several years.
And this is something
that has now begun
to fascinate people again.
You know, the original theory
goes back maybe 500 years.
And various, very well-known
historical figures
have talked about this.
Sir Isaac Newton was a
proponent for the hollow Earth.
The Earth is not
solid by a long shot.
You know, there's always a lot
of movement motion going on
down deep inside the Earth.
So the idea that there could be
large spaces inside the crust
of the Earth, even down
as far as the crust mantle
boundary that might be
conducive to habitation
is not that impossible.
>> There's a lot of scientists
today, planetary scientists,
credible planetary scientists,
that will tell you that when
a planet evolves, when
it comes into being,
it has to do so in such a way
that the center is hollow.
And in fact, they dropped a bomb
on the moon not too long ago.
And the geologist,
NASA geologist
wanted to record the
vibrations coming out
of it so they could
tell something
about the inner structure.
And it rang for eight hours
like a bell, like an empty bell.
And that kind of
gives you a glimpse.
Now, whether or not
the Earth itself
is completely hollowed
out inside, or whether
or not they are just
vast inner caverns that
might be the size of whole
continents, I'm not sure.
But what I can tell you is that
in ancient civilization, all
over the globe, they have
these hollow Earth stories.
>> In my research, I have
discovered maps that show a lot
of these deep underground
bases are also known as domes.
These bases are
in locations where
there appear to have been other
openings deep under the Earth.
And how do I know this?
Well, anybody can figure it
out because we have access
to the ground
penetrating radar data.
This data shows specific
types of caverns and openings
deep, deep beneath the
Earth, sometimes a mile deep.
And what it appears,
when you look
at some of these overlaying
military tunnels,
it seems as if they
knew where they were at.
So they actually tunneled
to these actual locations,
these ancient
locations, and kind of
made them into their path as
they created their own grid.
>> When we look at the
creation stories of our past,
as different as they
are from one another,
there are common themes that
weave them all together.
One of the most obvious
of these common threads
is the theme of another world
beneath this one, a world--
subterranean world-- from
which our ancestors emerged.
The Mayan calendar, for example,
it's a circular calendar.
And it shows four boxes with
unique lists representing
the four worlds of the past.
And the Maya say there have
been four previous worlds.
We live in the fifth world.
That it is represented by
the circle and the image
that is staring right
at us from that circle.
Each of those four previous
worlds was destroyed.
One was destroyed by wind.
One was destroyed by fire.
One was destroyed by ice.
And when the ice
melted, a great flood
destroyed the fourth world.
And that flood story is
one of the common themes
that we find throughout
these indigenous traditions.
So the question is,
is that just mythology
or are there any
physical links that
can help us relate to
these in the real world?
>> Maybe the links in
the physical world are
to our genetic existence and
how humans were able to survive
cataclysm after cataclysm.
>> The old species tend to
transcend into something else
sooner or later.
This is the process of evolution
and natural selection, which
some people find very annoying.
But I see no mileage in saying
evolution doesn't happen.
You need species
to have the ability
to bounce back from assaults.
You know, for example, if you
have a giant asteroid or comet
hit the Earth and
make life on Earth
extremely fragile
and tenuous, you
need to be able to
bounce back from that.
In other words, you need
to be able to duck and dive
and evolve to adapt
to the new situations
and keep the project
of life going.
The whole process of evolution
is a process of unfolding.
Could we become very different
from what we are now?
Yes, given enough time,
given enough new situations
to adapt to and develop with.
>> Could these new situations
have included taking refuge
within the inner Earth?
>> We have the biblical texts
about this notion of giants
in the old days.
And certainly, after
the great floods
and the great cataclysmic events
that may have sunk Atlantis,
we can only speculate
to say that there
could be a breakaway
civilization that
went underground at the
end of the last cataclysm.
And these beings-- some
of whom could be giants,
others could look just like us
or some similar human to us--
could be living
inside the Earth.
>> You get the Mayans
who kind of disappeared.
Like there's speculation
they may have ascended.
They maybe have gone to
a deeper plane existence
that we originally came out of.
And same with the Tuatha
De Danann in Ireland, like,
they're said to be gods, or
fairies, or ancestral spirits,
but they were originally people.
I also see, like,
a lot of legends
where people coming out of the
sea and coming out of the Earth
may explain--
may tie into the
Atlantis myth where
we've come from deeper plans of
ontology, because a lot of time
the underworld does represent
a deeper plane of existence.
>> Anton Park's research
indicates that the underworld
can also be linked to creation.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In ancient texts, in Gnostic,
Sumerian, even Egyptian texts,
the abyss is always linked
to the process of creation.
So we find this recurrent
theme of the abyss.
And through the research
that I have done,
I found out that Enki is
the master of the abyss,
of the great deep,
which also in some ways
corresponds to the underworld.
>> If you go back to the
Mesopotamian creation stories,
they talked about gods
from the sky, basically,
bioengineering a form of
humanity that was already here,
creating a more modern form.
But they don't necessarily
say that the engineering
was done in the sky.
For example, Enki was also the
god of the underwater realms.
So there was a possibility
that maybe there
was some realm
underwater or underground
where some of this activity
was being conducted.
And so you have
this possibility,
at least within the lore,
you don't necessarily
exclude sky born gods from
gods that lived underground
because people had both ideas
that the gods had realms
underground, underwater,
and in the sky.
And they interacted
with all of them.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Indeed, the further
back you go in history,
the more you are
faced with giants,
just like prehistoric animals
on Earth, for example,
the dinosaurs.
Roughly, I would say that
if Enki is about six feet
five inches, closer to human.
Anu and the other Sumerian
gods and goddesses, by the way
they were portrayed, I
would say are about 11 feet
5 inches, between 10 feet
and 11 feet five inches,
maybe even up to 14 feet.
>> If some of the Sumerian
gods were suggested to be giant
in size, how would this relate
to myths of an underworld
in South America?
Sonja Grace uses her
alternative research
to connect the dots on
the underground mythology
in Mesopotamia.
>> When I first spirit
traveled to the Ziggurat of Ur,
I was really amazed because
there was a very small
structure, like a temple,
made out of stone.
And the Ant People,
who I call the Savrox,
were all over the land.
They were everywhere.
And one of them came up to me.
And these are ginormous ants.
These are not, you know,
little ants or people
that look like-- they're ants.
And they came up to me and they
said, "We created this place
in the beginning.
And this is what we built
for the people of Atlantis
so that when Atlantis fell,
they had a place to go to.
We helped them to safety."
And they said, "We
want to take you in
and show you this place."
So we went through
this little opening
and we started going
down, and down,
and further, and further
into this long tunnel.
It went on forever.
And then all of a
sudden, it opened out
into this beautiful,
huge cavern.
There were all kinds
of rocks, and crystals,
and stones in the walls.
There was a lake.
And it went on into
further caverns.
It was enormous.
And they said, "This
is where we led
the people who did survive
and got out of Atlantis
before it fell."
And at the top of the
cave were these roots
from a big tree that
was coming down.
And they said that when
the people were there,
they referred to
this place as Eden.
It was the place
that they had to--
that was their refuge,
that saved them.
So they referred to
it and called it Eden.
And when the world
came back and life
was happening on
the surface again,
in the roots of the tree
that were coming down
from the top of the
cave, they could
see greenery coming
out and growing.
So they knew it was OK to
come back up to the surface.
And when they came back up,
they referred to this tree
as the Tree of Life.
>> If the underworld is not
only a place of creation,
might it also have
been a place to hide?
In the Hebrew
Bible, the nephilim
were the sons of gods mingling
with the daughters of Adam.
They were also known as
giants and considered
to be the fallen ones.
Michael Mott's research
suggests that they might
have retreated underground.
Are these the giants
described in ancient texts?
>> Some people will say that
these giants are pre-Adamites,
which means they came
about before Adam and Eve.
Some say that they
are nephilim, which
would mean they are part
human and part fallen angel.
And this is a theme that does
find a reflection in some
of the Native American
lore, because the giants are
described as having six fingers,
six toes, double rows of teeth.
Occasionally, they have horns.
And this ties right in with
the ancient description
of the nephilim, for instance
from the Book of Enoch,
and other sources, and even
from the Old Testament.
So this is something that
we see again and again.
They fled a cataclysm.
They fled something.
They fear.
So they go beneath
the Earth and they
claim that they live much
longer by living there.
There's plenty of water.
There are strange
areas where there
seems to be a lot
of high pressure
which blow out a lot
of breathable air.
But that's not to
say that you wouldn't
have to have a really
advanced level of,
not just civilization,
but technology in order
to carve out a space inside
the crust of the planet
and to make a sustainable
environment there.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> What became of the gods?
I'm not sure that I can give
an answer to this question.
Maybe that the survivors,
the ones that could still
be alive in our solar system,
live underground on Earth.
>> There are many reports
that these giants moved inside
the Earth, into inner Earth.
There may be a honeycomb of
caverns inside the Earth.
And there may be
groups living inside,
groups that are
non-terrestrial, groups
that left the surface of the
Earth many, many millennia ago
and just never came back out.
>> Has any evidence been
discovered that can prove
the existence of a lost,
underground civilization?
Historians have been
debating this for centuries.
Perhaps the answer
to this question
lies deep in the Amazon jungle,
2,500 miles south of Belize.
An indigenous tribe,
known as the Macushi,
have lived here with little
contact from the outside world
until the mid 18th century.
And yet, their
mythology is almost
identical to beings who protect
the hollow Earth described
by the Mayans.
>> You have that South
American tradition,
which is very interesting, of
the tribe that said that they
were guarding the entrance
to the inner Earth.
And they said it would take
maybe a couple of weeks
to finally get down
far enough where they
would meet the inhabitants.
And they were just these
gigantic people, anywhere
between 10 and 11.5 feet tall.
So of course, the
common idea is that, oh,
this is just a bunch of
mythology by primitive people.
But what's interesting
is they talked
about how when they
got far enough down,
one of the things they saw
was, basically, molten rock.
And that's exactly what
modern science tells us
you should find
underneath the Earth.
And how would a primitive
people know that?
There are also
areas where there's
all this lush plants, and food,
and the people living down
there.
Can we take that seriously?
We're left with this
very interesting myth
that has some few
intriguing elements to it.
It's worth a look if
we can get down there.
>> The Macushi
Indians of Guyana,
and also of the
northern Amazon basin,
have a very interesting
legend concerning an entrance
to the inner Earth.
And according to their
legend, there is an entrance
to the underworld there.
And at one point,
they were in charge
of security over the
entrance to this location.
And according to
their legend, they
could descend into this
world and come into contact
with the very tall men, who
were basically giants, 15 feet
tall, 12 feet tall.
And they had been
given this task
of guarding this location,
and the entrance,
and not letting
anyone else enter.
>> Traveling for 15 days down
into this cavern until they,
literally, put down their
torches because there's these
inner balls of light that will
light you the rest of the way
on steps that are
33 inches long.
Eventually, making it into
caverns where food was growing,
lit by four large, sun-like
disks that they couldn't even
stare at, they were so bright.
And they described
the food as being
apples the size of
a human head, grapes
the size of a human fist,
interacting with giant beings
that they described as being
three to four meters in height
who would catch giant fish
for them and give it to him
as a gift.
That kind of detail
coming from a culture
who didn't have any
access to libraries.
They don't have any access
to television, satellite,
internet.
How is it that they
come across, or begin
to tell stories, that
are being duplicated
in all these other cultures?
There has to be
some truth to it.
Now, whether it's completely
hollow inside or whether or not
these vast caverns
are just there,
I believe that they're there.
And a lot of people
believe that they're
inhabited by what
we would describe
as being an alien species, an
ultraterrestrial species rather
than an extraterrestrial
species.
>> Could these strange species
be linked to the Sumerian gods?
Many of these stories
about a lost civilization
under the Earth from indigenous
cultures around the world
have strong similarities.
Is it possible that
these giant creatures
were the sages described
in ancient Sumerian texts
and others?
And did these beings bring back
humanity after a cataclysm?
>> In Sumerian tradition, and
in the surviving texts that have
been passed down to us, there
is a very strong and intriguing
reference to what it called
the seven antediluvian sages.
Go over to India and we
have the seven rishis.
So this number keeps
on cropping up.
We can go further
away to Easter Island
and then we discover
an ancient tradition
that civilization was first
brought to Easter Island
by seven initiated men.
Now, how are we to
take all of this?
How can we put it into
some kind of context?
For me, what I think
we're looking at
is more evidence that there
was a high civilization
that we have lost
track of, that we truly
are a species with amnesia, and
that we have forgotten a very
important part of our story.
And fragments of that story
crop up all around the world.
What I think we're looking
at is an outreach program,
an outreach program reaching out
to the hunter-gatherers in what
we would call the
upper paleolithic,
and beginning to
teach certain of them
selected skills, giving them
the gifts of civilization.
But to find this theme
again, and again, and again--
the seven sages,
the seven wise men,
teaching the gifts
of civilization--
I would say we are looking
at symbolic allusions
towards the outreach
of a lost civilization.
>> But who are these beings
we have lost touch with?
>> If we look back throughout
all the historical cycles,
we find this interaction with
supposed reptilian humanoids.
And that goes as far as even
the mythic cycles of Europe.
And the whole concept of like,
for instance, frog princesses
and all these other
strange things
that we find coming down to us
in lore about these people who
aren't quite human or they
can pass as humans sometimes,
but they have a reptilian
aspect, the stories about them
and their interactions
with people.
It's often seen that--
like, for instance,
in the Mayan underworld--
that even though these brothers
kill some of these beings,
the Mayan royalty
traces their lineage
to some of these same beings.
And this is a theme we'll see,
you know, around the world,
whether it's China, Japan.
Wherever it is, you
have an elite group
that believes that they are
descended from these mostly
unseen beings who
live under the Earth.
The Annunaki in
the Sumerian texts
are described as being
reptilian, to some extent,
or have bird-like heads,
reptile-like heads.
Even in contemporary
accounts in ufology,
people talk about the reptoids
and these humanoid beings
with reptilian heads.
And this theme, again, is
associated with the underworld
and with these unseen
manipulators of the human race.
In the legend of
Central Asia, there
are stories about
subterranean civilizations.
One of these is called
Agartha or Agharti.
The other one is called Potala.
And Potala is often
associated with the Naga,
who are reptilian humanoids.
>> As described in
"The Mahabharata,"
the Nagas are considered to
be a subterranean, half-human,
half-serpent race.
At some point in
the ancient text,
they are important players in
many of the events in the epic
and, frequently, even
on the side of good,
given the nature
of their character.
They dwell in the
city Potala, which
is said in the Vishnu Purana
to have seven realms, which are
located one above the other.
Potala is a paradise.
And the Naga that live
there are described
as a very advanced race or
species with a highly developed
technology.
According to the
legend, they wage war
on the kingdom of Agartha.
>> The Agarthans are supposedly
enlightened human beings.
And they have a ruler over them
called the King of the World.
He has a capital called
Shambhala which is in Agartha.
And from this area,
supposedly, he
influences events on
the surface world.
They also influence
human civilization.
They either interfere with our
civilization to slow it down
or they give us little
things to help advance it,
when it suits their purposes.
We get the idea,
we get the story,
that there is more
than one group
and that they have
various agenda that
conflict with each other.
>> Are these underground
beings really manipulating us?
And if so, how?
Graham Seer believes
the underworld
is a world that reaches out
to us when we least expect it.
>> The entrances to the
inner Earth describe portals
into the underworld.
And the underworld
is actually a plane
between spirit and nature.
It's the area of
reality where spirit
becomes nature and nature
turns back into spirit.
So it's an intermediary sort of
paradoxical apparitional realm,
which is closer to spirit
than nature is, because it's
where nature comes out of.
It's where the spirits
initially start
to embody before they
finally densify and kind of
fall into this frequency range.
You can look at it as
the Christian purgatory,
or the Celtic Otherworld,
or the Egyptian Duat,
or the Kabbalistic Yetzirah.
These are all different
names that refer
to this intermediary plane.
And it's also where
prophetic imagination occurs
and all these things.
It's where revelation occurs.
>> We are drawn to caves.
Joseph Campbell said that all of
the world's religions probably
started in some cave in Siberia,
where the first shamans went
and had a dream or a vision,
told a story and the story
was retold and retold.
Interesting that it might
have been in a cave.
Well, the shamans in
Siberia lived in caves,
but caves reach down and down.
Spelunkers go and
explore the depths
of unseen parts of the planet.
This planet, the planet we
have known and studied so well,
there are all these
unseen places.
There is more to be known.
Even as our technology
advances, we
have to be humbled by how much
close at hand we do not know.
The ancients, the people, the
primal people that lived close
to the Earth saw the gods and
spirits, the sacred energies,
as down in those places.
Whether we go down to explore
physically-- personally,
I'll let somebody else
do the exploring--
but I want to explore
mentally and spiritually.
I want to imagine
what is below us,
what the Earth has to teach us.
It is a living thing and
our lives are tied to it.
So we don't have to be adherents
of the ancient nature religions
to know this is important stuff.
But the stories can help us.
That perhaps there is
some kind of personality
that we're in a relationship
with, some god, some goddess--
more likely, since the Earth
is maternal, it feeds us--
that we need to be respectful
of and to seek a deeper
relationship with.
>> Could there really be beings
living inside of the Earth
manipulating humans?
Is it possible we, at one
time, were created or recreated
beneath the surface?
Or is the meaning
behind the legends
a metaphor for the greatest
secrets the Earth keeps
on our human existence?
Does this mean we
are all searching
for our own personal Xibalba?
Andrew Collins
suggests something
from beyond this planet might be
trying to get in touch with us
on the surface.
He points to a discovery by
astronomers at the Green Bank
Telescope that suggested
light signals were emanating
from a star in the
Cygnus constellation
1,200 light years away.
This fluctuating star
was cataloged KIC 8462852
and named Tabby's Star.
>> Now, what I have determined,
related to this star,
is that there are certain cycles
associated with the Kepler
data.
They are all interlinked.
And they all reflect
certain key numbers.
And those key numbers are the
numbers 11, 121, and 1331.
Now all of them are
multiples of 11.
>> Up next is there something
trying to help us figure out
this code to humanity?
And could they be using our own
ancient sites on this planet?
[MUSIC PLAYING]